# crm

`crm` stands for **c**ompositional **r**epresentable **m**achines

## development

This is a Haskell Cabal project that uses Nix for development. Nix is optional but recommended.

### environment

A Nix shell is available with all the required tools. To enter the shell, issue

```sh
# default GHC
nix develop

# custom GHC
nix develop .#ghc90
nix develop .#ghc92
```

Or, without flakes:
```sh
# default GHC
nix-shell
```

### GHC version

The project has a default GHC version that is specified in the flake.

It is also possible to use other GHC versions to build the project and enter development shells. This allows us to easily test multiple versions.

### Building

In a development shell, you can simply build the project with Cabal:

```sh
cabal build
```

This provides us fast incremental builds, ease of debugging, etc.

It is also possible to build the project without entering the development shell.
This allows us to build the same way as the CI/CD environment, build with different GHC versions, build container images, etc.

To do this, run
```sh
# default GHC
nix build

# custom GHC
nix build .#crm.ghc90
nix build .#crm.ghc92
```

To view the compilation logs, you can append `-L`:
```sh
nix build -L
nix build -L .#crm.ghc92
```

## project setup

- `flake.nix`

This file specifies our project's dependencies and outputs/artefacts.
Some common dependencies for a Haskell project are the GHC and Cabal, but during development we also use HLS, hpack, ....
Nix flake dependencies are called *inputs*, and are usually Git repositories (e.g. from GitHub, GitLab, ...), but they can be any web-accessible resource.

By using Nix and Nixpkgs, the developers do not have to have those tools installed on their machines, manage their versions, etc.
It also allows us to create other controlled environments, such as container images for CI/CD.

The project should still build without Nix, because Nix does not change any project files. This means you must have Cabal and system libraries installed manually.

- `flake.lock`

This file is automatically generated and updated by Nix, when evaluating the `flake.nix` file.
It contains the timestamps and hashes of each input at the time of last update.

An input coupled with a timestamp and hash of its contents is called a *pinned* input. Pinning inputs allows us to gurantee reproducibility.

We can specify unpinned inputs in `flake.nix`; for example, our `nixpkgs` input is not pinned to a specific commit. The branch `nixpkgs-unstable` changes almost every day.
However, the `flake.lock` file contains a timestamp and hash of a specific commit in the `nixpkgs` repository. This is regenerated for every input every time we run `nix flake upadate`, to the latest commit in the branch/tag we specified in the flake.

We can also update just a single input (e.g. just `nixpkgs`) and leave the others pinned.
One way of doing this is with the command:
```sh
nix build . --update-input nixpkgs
```

- `shell.nix`

Nix flakes are a new feature. Some Nix installations do not support them. However, it is still useful to provide a development shell for developers with older Nix versions.

This file allows us to replicate the development shell provided in `flake.nix` without duplicating the code. This way changes to the `flake.nix` are automaticaly propagated to the `shell.nix`.

Some tools also don't yet support flakes. An important example is Visual Studio Code with the Nix Environment Selector plugin: it works with `shell.nix`, but not `flake.nix`.

- `hie.yaml`

This file instructs the Haskell Language Server how your project should be built. Find more information at [https://haskell-language-server.readthedocs.io/en/latest/configuration.html](https://haskell-language-server.readthedocs.io/en/latest/configuration.html).

- `package.yaml`

This file contains the Cabal package specification in Yaml format read by Hpack. It is more abstract and easier to maintain than the Cabal file format.

To generate a `.cabal` file from a `package.yaml` file, run the following command:
```sh
hpack
```

Note that Cabal does not understand `package.yaml` files, and requires us to generate a `.cabal` file before running `cabal`.
Nix (or more precisely, Cabal2nix) uses a `.cabal` file if it is present, otherwise the `package.yaml` file. Because `package.yaml` is our single source of truth, we would prefer that Nix uses it instead of the generated `.cabal`. This is why we don't commit the `.cabal` file.

- `crm.cabal`

This file is automatically generated from the `package.yaml` file and should not be committed to Git history.
